[THEME MUSIC]
>> Long-term negative thinking
could lead to dementia
and Alzheimer's disease.
This is "Gaia News."
[THEME MUSIC]
A groundbreaking study out
of University College London
suggests repetitive
negative thinking, or RNT,
could lead to dementia
and Alzheimer's disease
later in life.
The study included 292 healthy
adults aged 55 and older.
Over the course of
the two-year study,
participants graded
how they typically
thought about
negative experiences,
including rumination
about the past
and worry about the future.
Some participants
received brain scans
measuring the level
of the proteins that
cause Alzheimer's when
they build up in the brain.
The results?
People who had higher
levels of negative thinking
did show indicators of
Alzheimer's dementia.
Ilene Naomi Rusk,
neurobehavioral consultant,
explains the significance.
>> The study particularly
showed that beta amyloid
and phosphorylated tau,
two proteins specifically
associated with Alzheimer's
disease, build up in the brain.
So there was this
direct relationship
between repeated
negative thinking
and the buildup of these
depositions of tau and amyloid.
>> Why is this happening?
What is happening in the brain?
>> To be honest with
you, we don't really know
what's happening in the brain,
in terms of why repetitive
negative thinking produces
changes in the brain.
One of the speculations is
repetitive negative thinking
is associated with stress.
When we have changes
in blood pressure
and the health of the heart
and other physiologic systems,
then we are automatically having
changes in the brain, as well.
>> If we recognize repetitive
negative thoughts in ourselves,
how can we stop it?
>> Actually, this is a cure and
treatment for repeated negative
repetitive negative thinking.
Social engagement,
connecting with other people
is a data-driven way to delay
the likelihood that you'll
get cognitive decline.
And even if you have cognitive
decline, it's protective.
So in addition to
creativity, I think exercise.
Clean air.
Clean water.
Clean food.
And this staying
connected to other people
in a warm and loving way.
>> For Dr. Darren Weissman,
developer of the Lifeline
Technique and author of
"The Power of Infinite Love
and Gratitude," there
is a deeper, perhaps,
even more spiritual process to
stop the negative thought loop.
>> You know, when people are
creating change on a deep
level, there's a process.
And the process is ways to get
present, first and foremost,
because that's where
our power comes from.
We can use the power
of our imagination
to begin to shift the chemistry
of our mind and therefore,
our heart, our
brain, and our body.
So there's a process in
shifting these reactive patterns
on a deeper level that create
a sustainable deep change.
>> If you are worried you
are experiencing brain health
problems, Dr. Ilene Naomi
Rusk has some advice.
>> First of all, I
trust my patients.
I trust anyone who says to me
I'm having thinking problems.
I'm having memory problems.
So the important thing to
do is not to ignore it.
It's actually to go to your
doctor, go to a neurologist,
go to a neuropsychologist
and get some testing.
So make no assumptions if
you have memory problems
and get help.
>> For Darren Weissman,
this study and the effects
of Alzheimer's
are very personal.
>> My father had
horrible Alzheimer's.
It was a brutal situation.
And it was wild because the
Father's Day before he died,
I took him and my
youngest son fishing.
And he woke up and
my dad was there
in this way that was
just so extraordinary.
Where someone is
in their passion.
That's a doorway that we
can open beyond the pill,
through learning how to
go deep into the heart.
>> A new tool in the
fight against dementia
and Alzheimer's could be the
ability to recognize and stop
repetitive negative thoughts
that could hurt you in the long
run.
As scientific studies
keep progressing,
we might find that
the simple tool could
be just the tip of the iceberg.
But for now, the message
seems to be clear.
That the cure lies
within all of us.
For a new perspective,
this is "Gaia News."